Last video,
you learned about word vectors and
you saw that they can capture
important properties of words.
This week, you will make use of word
vectors to learn to align words in two
different languages, which will give you
your first basic translation program.
Later, I'll teach you locality
sensitive hashing to speed it up.
Let's first get an overview of
machine translation by starting with
an example of English
to French translation.
In order to translate an English
word to a French word.
One way would be to generate
an extensive list of English words and
their associated French word.
If you ask the human to do this,
you would find someone who knows both
languages to start making a list.
If you want a machine to learn how to do
this, you would calculate word embeddings
associated with English and
word embeddings associated with French.
Next retrieve the English word embedding
of a particular English word such as cat.
Then find some way to transform
the English word embedding into word
embedding that has the meaning
in the French word vector space.
We will see how to convert from
the English word vector space
to the French word vector
space in the moment.
Next, you'll take the transformed word
vector and search for word vectors and
the French word vector space
that are most similar to it.
The most similar words are candidates
words for your translation.
If your machine does a good job,
it may find the word chat which
is the French word for cat.
You want to find the matrix that
can do this transformation for you.
So let's talk about transforming
vectors using matrices.
To try this out for yourself, you can
write the following code which is also in
the notebook associated with this lecture.
Define the matrix R, then defined the
vector x, multiply x by R using numpy dot
and the result is another two dimensional
vector which is what you saw earlier.
Please try this out for yourself.
Now that we know that there can be matrix
that transforms our English word vectors
into relevant French word vectors.
How do we define this transformation
matrix which will denote as R?
We can start with a randomly selected
matrix R and then see how it performs.
When you try to translate
the English vectors in matrix X and
compare that to the actual French word
vectors which is in the matrix Y.
In order for this to work, you will first
need to get a subset of English words and
their French equivalents.
Get their respective word vectors and
stack the word vectors in
the respective matrices, X and Y.
The key here is to keep the roads lined
up, or to align the word vectors.
This means that if the first row of matrix
X contains the word cat, then the first
row of the matrix Y should contain
the French word for cat which is chat.
Now you may be asking wait a minute.
If I already have the English words and
their French translations,
why do I need to train a model to do this?
Why not just save this information
in a key value mapping like a python
dictionary?
Well, the nice thing is that you
can just collect a subset of these
words to find your transformation matrix.
And if it works well, then the model can
be used to translate words that are not
part of your original training set.
So you only need to train on a subset
of the English French vocabulary and
not the entire vocabulary.
So let's see how to
find the good matrix R.
First we compare the translation X
times are with the actual French
word embeddings in Y.
We do this by taking the X matrix times
the R matrix and subtracting the Y matrix.
I'll explain in more detail
what this expression means and
also what this capital F subscript means.
But for now think of it as a measure of
how far apart the attempted translation
and the actual French vectors are.
If you start with a random matrix R,
you can gradually improve
these matrix R in a loop.
First compute the gradient by taking
the derivative of this loss function
with respect to the matrix R.
Next update the matrix R by
subtracting the gradient, but
note that it's the gradient weighted
by the learning rate alpha.
You can either pick a fixed number
of times to go through the loop or
check the loss at each iteration.
And break out of the loop when the loss
falls between a certain threshold.
Now let's explain what this notation,
what the double vertical lines means.
This is measuring the magnitude or
the norm of a matrix.
Let's see an example of calculating this
norm, and then see the general formula.
Let's say that the results of
X times R minus Y is a matrix.
We'll pretend for this example that
there's only two words in this dictionary,
which is the number of rows in the matrix.
And the word embeddings
have two dimensions.
So that's the number of
columns in the matrix.
So matrices X, R, Y and
A are all 2 by 2 matrices.
If the matrix A looks like this, then to
calculate its norm, we take two squared
plus two squared plus two squared plus
two squared, then take square roots.
This gives us four.
Here is the actual formula.
You just take all the elements in
the matrix, square them and add them up.
This norm has the subscript F.
Because this is called the frobenius norm.
Now let's calculate
the frobenius norm in code.
You start with a matrix A, use numpy
dot square to square all the elements.
Then use numpy dot some,
then numpy dot square roots to get four.
Try it out for yourself.
Know that in practice it's easier to
minimize the square of the frobenius norm.
In other words, we can cancel out
the square roots by taking the square.
I'll explain in a moment why it's easier
to work with the square of the norm.
If we go back to our example with
matrix A, the squared frobenius norm is
just two squared plus two squared
plus two squared plus two squared.
Then we take the square root, but
then cancel it out by squaring that some.
So the square of the frobenius norm is 16.
Now let's also go into detail
on how you can calculate
the gradient of the loss function.
The loss is defined as the square
of the frobenius norm,
the gradient is a derivative,
the laws with respect to the matrix R.
If it looks like this, the scalar,
M is the number of rows or
words in the subset that we're using for
training.
If you remember from calculus,
this may look familiar to you if
you pretend that R as a single
variable instead of a matrix.
And x and y are constants.
If you don't recognize this, don't worry,
you won't need to know calculus here.
You'll be able to look up these
derivatives online if you ever need to.
Now going back to Y, it helps to use
the square of the frobenius norm.
It's easier to take
the derivative of this expression,
rather than dealing with the square
roots that's in the frobenius norm.
You'll implement this
formula in the assignment.
You have seen how with just one matrix,
you can learn to align word vectors
from one language to another.
We will next look at
the nearest neighbors.